

Schaber2012 - Hog pathway in yeast

The high osmolarity glycerol (HOG) pathway in the yeast Saccharomyces
cerevisiae is one of the best-studied mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
pathways and serves as a prototype signalling system for eukaryotes. This
pathway is necessary and sufficient to adapt to high external osmolarity. A
key component of this pathway is the stress-activated protein kinase (SAPK)
Hog1, which is rapidly phosphorylated by the SAPK kinase Pbs2 upon hyper-
osmotic shock, and which is the terminal kinase of two parallel signalling
pathways, subsequently called the Sho1 branch and the Sln1 branch,
respectively. Ensemble modelling (192 models) is used to study the yeast HOG
pathway, a prototype for eukaryotic mitogen-activated kinase signalling
systems. The best fit model (Model Nr.22: described here) provides new
insights into the function of this system, some of which are then
experimentally validated.

This model is described in the article:

[Modelling reveals novel roles of two parallel signalling pathways and
homeostatic feedbacks in yeast.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/23149687)

Schaber J, Baltanas R, Bush A, Klipp E, Colman-Lerner A.

Mol Syst Biol. 2012 Nov 13;8:622.

Abstract:

The high osmolarity glycerol (HOG) pathway in yeast serves as a prototype
signalling system for eukaryotes. We used an unprecedented amount of data to
parameterise 192 models capturing different hypotheses about molecular
mechanisms underlying osmo-adaptation and selected a best approximating model.
This model implied novel mechanisms regulating osmo-adaptation in yeast. The
model suggested that (i) the main mechanism for osmo-adaptation is a fast and
transient non-transcriptional Hog1-mediated activation of glycerol production,
(ii) the transcriptional response serves to maintain an increased steady-state
glycerol production with low steady-state Hog1 activity, and (iii) fast
negative feedbacks of activated Hog1 on upstream signalling branches serves to
stabilise adaptation response. The best approximating model also indicated
that homoeostatic adaptive systems with two parallel redundant signalling
branches show a more robust and faster response than single-branch systems. We
corroborated this notion to a large extent by dedicated measurements of volume
recovery in single cells. Our study also demonstrates that systematically
testing a model ensemble against data has the potential to achieve a better
and unbiased understanding of molecular mechanisms.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/)
and identified by:
[MODEL1209110001](http://identifiers.org/biomodels.db/MODEL1209110001) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: [BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic
models](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

